---
title: SELECT
description: The SELECT statement is used to query the database. The result of a SELECT is zero or more rows of data where each row has a fixed number of columns.
statement: SELECT * FROM Artist;
customClass: sqlite-doc
---

## 1. Overview

<!-- do-not-touch-svg-import: 'select.svg' -->

The SELECT statement is used to query the database. The result of a
SELECT is zero or more rows of data where each row has a fixed number of
columns. A SELECT statement does not make any changes to the database.

The "<a href="https://www.sqlite.org/syntax/select-stmt.html"
target="_blank">select-stmt</a>" syntax diagram above attempts to show
as much of the SELECT statement syntax as possible in a single diagram,
because some readers find that helpful. The following
"<a href="https://www.sqlite.org/syntax/factored-select-stmt.html"
target="_blank">factored-select-stmt</a>" is an alternative syntax
diagrams that expresses the same syntax but tries to break the syntax
down into smaller chunks. 

<!-- do-not-touch-svg-import: 'select2.svg' -->

Note that there are paths through the syntax diagrams that are not
allowed in practice. Some examples:

- A [VALUES](lang_select#values) clause can be the first element in a
  [compound SELECT](lang_select#compound) that uses a [WITH](lang_with)
  clause, but a [simple SELECT](lang_select#simpleselect) that consists
  of just a [VALUES](lang_select#values) clause cannot be preceded by a
  [WITH](lang_with) clause.
- The [WITH](lang_with) clause must occur on the first SELECT of a
  [compound SELECT](lang_select#compound). It cannot follow a
  <a href="https://www.sqlite.org/syntax/compound-operator.html"
  target="_blank">compound-operator</a>.

These and other similar syntax restrictions are described in the text.

The SELECT statement is the most complicated command in the SQL
language. To make the description easier to follow, some of the passages
below describe the way the data returned by a SELECT statement is
determined as a series of steps. It is important to keep in mind that
this is purely illustrative - in practice neither SQLite nor any other
SQL engine is required to follow this or any other specific process.
<span id="simpleselect"></span>

## 2. Simple Select Processing

The core of a SELECT statement is a "simple SELECT" shown by the
<a href="https://www.sqlite.org/syntax/select-core.html"
target="_blank">select-core</a> and
<a href="https://www.sqlite.org/syntax/simple-select-stmt.html"
target="_blank">simple-select-stmt</a> syntax diagrams below. In
practice, most SELECT statements are simple SELECT statements.

<!-- do-not-touch-svg-import: 'select3.svg' -->

Generating the results of a simple SELECT statement is presented as a
four step process in the description below:

1.  [FROM clause](lang_select#fromclause) processing: The input data for
    the simple SELECT is determined. The input data is either implicitly
    a single row with 0 columns (if there is no FROM clause) or is
    determined by the FROM clause.

2.  [WHERE clause](lang_select#whereclause) processing: The input data
    is filtered using the WHERE clause expression.

3.  [GROUP BY, HAVING and result-column
    expression](lang_select#resultset) processing: The set of result
    rows is computed by aggregating the data according to any GROUP BY
    clause and calculating the result-set expressions for the rows of
    the filtered input dataset.

4.  [DISTINCT/ALL keyword](lang_select#distinct) processing: If the
    query is a "SELECT DISTINCT" query, duplicate rows are removed from
    the set of result rows.

There are two types of simple SELECT statement - aggregate and
non-aggregate queries. A simple SELECT statement is an aggregate query
if it contains either a GROUP BY clause or one or more aggregate
functions in the result-set. Otherwise, if a simple SELECT contains no
aggregate functions or a GROUP BY clause, it is a non-aggregate query.
<span id="fromclause"></span>

## 2.1. Determination of input data (FROM clause processing)

The input data used by a simple SELECT query is a set of *N* rows each
*M* columns wide.

If the FROM clause is omitted from a simple SELECT statement, then the
input data is implicitly a single row zero columns wide (i.e. *N*=1 and
*M*=0).

If a FROM clause is specified, the data on which a simple SELECT query
operates comes from the one or more tables or subqueries (SELECT
statements in parentheses) specified following the FROM keyword. A
subquery specified in the <span class="yyterm">table-or-subquery</span>
following the FROM clause in a simple SELECT statement is handled as if
it was a table containing the data returned by executing the subquery
statement. Each column of the subquery has the
<a href="https://www.sqlite.org/datatype3.html#collation"
target="_blank">collation sequence</a> and
<a href="https://www.sqlite.org/datatype3.html#affinity"
target="_blank">affinity</a> of the corresponding expression in the
subquery statement.

If there is only a single table or subquery in the FROM clause, then the
input data used by the SELECT statement is the contents of the named
table. If there is more than one table or subquery in FROM clause then
the contents of all tables and/or subqueries are joined into a single
dataset for the simple SELECT statement to operate on. Exactly how the
data is combined depends on the specific
<a href="https://www.sqlite.org/syntax/join-operator.html"
target="_blank">join-operator</a> and
<a href="https://www.sqlite.org/syntax/join-constraint.html"
target="_blank">join-constraint</a> used to connect the tables or
subqueries together.

All joins in SQLite are based on the cartesian product of the left and
right-hand datasets. The columns of the cartesian product dataset are,
in order, all the columns of the left-hand dataset followed by all the
columns of the right-hand dataset. There is a row in the cartesian
product dataset formed by combining each unique combination of a row
from the left-hand and right-hand datasets. In other words, if the
left-hand dataset consists of
*N<sub><span class="small">left</span></sub>* rows of
*M<sub><span class="small">left</span></sub>* columns, and the
right-hand dataset of *N<sub><span class="small">right</span></sub>*
rows of *M<sub><span class="small">right</span></sub>* columns, then the
cartesian product is a dataset of
*N<sub><span class="small">left</span></sub>Ã—N<sub><span class="small">right</span></sub>*
rows, each containing
*M<sub><span class="small">left</span></sub>+M<sub><span class="small">right</span></sub>*
columns.

If the join-operator is "CROSS JOIN", "INNER JOIN", "JOIN" or a comma
(",") and there is no ON or USING clause, then the result of the join is
simply the cartesian product of the left and right-hand datasets. If
join-operator does have ON or USING clauses, those are handled according
to the following bullet points:

- If there is an ON clause then the ON expression is evaluated for each
  row of the cartesian product as a [boolean
  expression](lang_expr#booleanexpr). Only rows for which the expression
  evaluates to true are included from the dataset.

- If there is a USING clause then each of the column names specified
  must exist in the datasets to both the left and right of the
  join-operator. For each pair of named columns, the expression "lhs.X =
  rhs.X" is evaluated for each row of the cartesian product as a
  [boolean expression](lang_expr#booleanexpr). Only rows for which all
  such expressions evaluates to true are included from the result set.
  When comparing values as a result of a USING clause, the normal rules
  for handling affinities, collation sequences and NULL values in
  comparisons apply. The column from the dataset on the left-hand side
  of the join-operator is considered to be on the left-hand side of the
  comparison operator (=) for the purposes of collation sequence and
  affinity precedence.

  For each pair of columns identified by a USING clause, the column from
  the right-hand dataset is omitted from the joined dataset. This is the
  only difference between a USING clause and its equivalent ON
  constraint.

- If the NATURAL keyword is in the join-operator then an implicit USING
  clause is added to the join-constraints. The implicit USING clause
  contains each of the column names that appear in both the left and
  right-hand input datasets. If the left and right-hand input datasets
  feature no common column names, then the NATURAL keyword has no effect
  on the results of the join. A USING or ON clause may not be added to a
  join that specifies the NATURAL keyword.

- If the join-operator is a "LEFT JOIN" or "LEFT OUTER JOIN", then after
  the ON or USING filtering clauses have been applied, an extra row is
  added to the output for each row in the original left-hand input
  dataset that does not match any row in the right-hand dataset. The
  added rows contain NULL values in the columns that would normally
  contain values copied from the right-hand input dataset.

- <span id="rjoin"></span> If the join-operator is a "RIGHT JOIN" or
  "RIGHT OUTER JOIN", then after the ON or USING filtering clauses have
  been applied, an extra row is added to the output for each row in the
  original right-hand input dataset that does not match any row in the
  left-hand dataset. The added rows contain NULL values in the columns
  that would normally contain values copied from the left-hand input
  dataset.

- <span id="fulljoin"></span> A "FULL JOIN" or "FULL OUTER JOIN" is a
  combination of a "LEFT JOIN" and a "RIGHT JOIN". Extra rows of output
  are added for each row in left dataset that matches no rows in the
  right, and for each row in the right dataset that matches no rows in
  the left. Unmatched columns are filled in with NULL.

When more than two tables are joined together as part of a FROM clause,
the join operations are processed in order from left to right. In other
words, the FROM clause (A join-op-1 B join-op-2 C) is computed as ((A
join-op-1 B) join-op-2 C). <span id="crossjoin"></span>

## 2.2. Special handling of CROSS JOIN.

There is no difference between the "INNER JOIN", "JOIN" and "," join
operators. They are completely interchangeable in SQLite. The "CROSS
JOIN" join operator produces the same result as the "INNER JOIN", "JOIN"
and "," operators, but is
<a href="https://www.sqlite.org/optoverview.html#crossjoin"
target="_blank">handled differently by the query optimizer</a> in that
it prevents the query optimizer from reordering the tables in the join.
An application programmer can use the CROSS JOIN operator to directly
influence the algorithm that is chosen to implement the SELECT
statement. Avoid using CROSS JOIN except in specific situations where
manual control of the query optimizer is desired. Avoid using CROSS JOIN
early in the development of an application as doing so is a
<a href="http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?PrematureOptimization"
target="_blank">premature optimization</a>. The special handling of
CROSS JOIN is an SQLite-specific feature and is not a part of standard
SQL. <span id="whereclause"></span>

## 2.3. WHERE clause filtering.

If a WHERE clause is specified, the WHERE expression is evaluated for
each row in the input data as a [boolean
expression](lang_expr#booleanexpr). Only rows for which the WHERE clause
expression evaluates to true are included from the dataset before
continuing. Rows are excluded from the result if the WHERE clause
evaluates to either false or NULL.

For a JOIN or INNER JOIN or CROSS JOIN, there is no difference between a
constraint expression in the WHERE clause and one in the ON clause.
However, for a LEFT JOIN or LEFT OUTER JOIN, the difference is very
important. In a LEFT JOIN, the extra NULL row for the right-hand table
is added after ON clause processing but before WHERE clause processing.
A constraint of the form "left.x=right.y" in an ON clause will therefore
allow through the added all-NULL rows of the right table. But if that
same constraint is in the WHERE clause a NULL in "right.y" will prevent
the expression "left.x=right.y" from being true, and thus exclude that
row from the output. <span id="resultset"></span>

## 2.4. Generation of the set of result rows

Once the input data from the FROM clause has been filtered by the WHERE
clause expression (if any), the set of result rows for the simple SELECT
are calculated. Exactly how this is done depends on whether the simple
SELECT is an aggregate or non-aggregate query, and whether or not a
GROUP BY clause was specified.

The list of expressions between the SELECT and FROM keywords is known as
the result expression list. If a result expression is the special
expression "\*" then all columns in the input data are substituted for
that one expression. If the expression is the alias of a table or
subquery in the FROM clause followed by ".\*" then all columns from the
named table or subquery are substituted for the single expression. It is
an error to use a "\*" or "alias.\*" expression in any context other
than a result expression list. It is also an error to use a "\*" or
"alias.\*" expression in a simple SELECT query that does not have a FROM
clause.

The number of columns in the rows returned by a simple SELECT statement
is equal to the number of expressions in the result expression list
after substitution of \* and alias.\* expressions. Each result row is
calculated by evaluating the expressions in the result expression list
with respect to a single row of input data or, for aggregate queries,
with respect to a group of rows.

- If the SELECT statement is **a non-aggregate query**, then each
  expression in the result expression list is evaluated for each row in
  the dataset filtered by the WHERE clause.

- If the SELECT statement is **an aggregate query without a GROUP BY**
  clause, then each aggregate expression in the result-set is evaluated
  once across the entire dataset. Each non-aggregate expression in the
  result-set is evaluated once for an arbitrarily selected row of the
  dataset. The same arbitrarily selected row is used for each
  non-aggregate expression. Or, if the dataset contains zero rows, then
  each non-aggregate expression is evaluated against a row consisting
  entirely of NULL values.

  The single row of result-set data created by evaluating the aggregate
  and non-aggregate expressions in the result-set forms the result of an
  aggregate query without a GROUP BY clause. An aggregate query without
  a GROUP BY clause always returns exactly one row of data, even if
  there are zero rows of input data.

- If the SELECT statement is **an aggregate query with a GROUP BY**
  clause, then each of the expressions specified as part of the GROUP BY
  clause is evaluated for each row of the dataset according to the
  processing rules stated below for ORDER BY expressions. Each row is
  then assigned to a "group" based on the results; rows for which the
  results of evaluating the GROUP BY expressions are the same get
  assigned to the same group. For the purposes of grouping rows, NULL
  values are considered equal. The usual rules for
  <a href="https://www.sqlite.org/datatype3.html#collation"
  target="_blank">selecting a collation sequence</a> with which to
  compare text values apply when evaluating expressions in a GROUP BY
  clause. The expressions in the GROUP BY clause do *not* have to be
  expressions that appear in the result. The expressions in a GROUP BY
  clause may not be aggregate expressions.

  If a HAVING clause is specified, it is evaluated once for each group
  of rows as a [boolean expression](lang_expr#booleanexpr). If the
  result of evaluating the HAVING clause is false, the group is
  discarded. If the HAVING clause is an aggregate expression, it is
  evaluated across all rows in the group. If a HAVING clause is a
  non-aggregate expression, it is evaluated with respect to an
  arbitrarily selected row from the group. The HAVING expression may
  refer to values, even aggregate functions, that are not in the result.

  Each expression in the result-set is then evaluated once for each
  group of rows. If the expression is an aggregate expression, it is
  evaluated across all rows in the group. Otherwise, it is evaluated
  against a single arbitrarily chosen row from within the group. If
  there is more than one non-aggregate expression in the result-set,
  then all such expressions are evaluated for the same row.

  Each group of input dataset rows contributes a single row to the set
  of result rows. Subject to filtering associated with the DISTINCT
  keyword, the number of rows returned by an aggregate query with a
  GROUP BY clause is the same as the number of groups of rows produced
  by applying the GROUP BY and HAVING clauses to the filtered input
  dataset.

<span id="bareagg"></span>

## 2.5. Bare columns in an aggregate query

The usual case is that all column names in an aggregate query are either
arguments to [aggregate functions](lang_aggfunc) or else appear in the
GROUP BY clause. A result column which contains a column name that is
not within an aggregate function and that does not appear in the GROUP
BY clause (if one exists) is called a "bare" column. Example:

>     SELECT a, b, sum(c) FROM tab1 GROUP BY a;

In the query above, the "a" column is part of the GROUP BY clause and so
each row of the output contains one of the distinct values for "a". The
"c" column is contained within the [sum()](lang_aggfunc#sumunc)
aggregate function and so that output column is the sum of all "c"
values in rows that have the same value for "a". But what is the result
of the bare column "b"? The answer is that the "b" result will be the
value for "b" in one of the input rows that form the aggregate. The
problem is that you usually do not know which input row is used to
compute "b", and so in many cases the value for "b" is undefined.

Special processing occurs when the aggregate function is either
[min()](lang_aggfunc#min_agg) or [max()](lang_aggfunc#max_agg). Example:

>     SELECT a, b, max(c) FROM tab1 GROUP BY a;

If there is exactly one [min()](lang_aggfunc#max_agg) or
[max()](lang_aggfunc#min_agg) aggregate in the query, then all bare
columns in the result set take values from an input row which also
contains the minimum or maximum. So in the query above, the value of the
"b" column in the output will be the value of the "b" column in the
input row that has the largest "c" value. There are limitations on this
special behavior of [min()](lang_aggfunc#max_agg) and
[max()](lang_aggfunc#min_agg):

1.  If the same minimum or maximum value occurs on two or more rows,
    then bare values might be selected from any of those rows. The
    choice is arbitrary. There is no way to predict from which row the
    bare values will be choosen. The choice might be different for
    different bare columns within the same query.

2.  If there are two or more [min()](lang_aggfunc#min_agg) or
    [max()](lang_aggfunc#max_agg) aggregates in the query, then bare
    column values will be taken from one of the rows on which one of the
    aggregates has their minimum or maximum value. The choice of which
    [min()](lang_aggfunc#min_agg) or [max()](lang_aggfunc#max_agg)
    aggregate determines the selection of bare column values is
    arbitrary. The choice might be different for different bare columns
    within the same query.

3.  This special processing for [min()](lang_aggfunc#min_agg) or
    [max()](lang_aggfunc#max_agg) aggregates only works for the built-in
    implementation of those aggregates. If an application overrides the
    built-in [min()](lang_aggfunc#min_agg) or
    [max()](lang_aggfunc#max_agg) aggregates with application-defined
    alternatives, then the values selected for bare columns will be
    taken from an arbitrary row.

Most other SQL database engines disallow bare columns. If you include a
bare column in a query, other database engines will usually raise an
error. The ability to include bare columns in a query is an
SQLite-specific extension. This is considered a feature, not a bug. See
the discussion on
<a href="https://sqlite.org/forum/forumpost/7481d2a6df8980ff"
target="_blank">SQLite Forum thread 7481d2a6df8980ff</a> for additional
information.

<span id="distinct"></span>

## 2.6. Removal of duplicate rows (DISTINCT processing)

One of the ALL or DISTINCT keywords may follow the SELECT keyword in a
simple SELECT statement. If the simple SELECT is a SELECT ALL, then the
entire set of result rows are returned by the SELECT. If neither ALL or
DISTINCT are present, then the behavior is as if ALL were specified. If
the simple SELECT is a SELECT DISTINCT, then duplicate rows are removed
from the set of result rows before it is returned. For the purposes of
detecting duplicate rows, two NULL values are considered to be equal.
The <a href="https://www.sqlite.org/datatype3.html#colrules"
target="_blank">usual rules</a> apply for selecting a collation sequence
to compare text values. <span id="compound"></span>

## 3. Compound Select Statements

Two or more [simple SELECT](lang_select#simpleselect) statements may be
connected together to form a compound SELECT using the UNION, UNION ALL,
INTERSECT or EXCEPT operator, as shown by the following diagram:

<!-- do-not-touch-svg-import: 'select4.svg' -->

In a compound SELECT, all the constituent SELECTs must return the same
number of result columns. As the components of a compound SELECT must be
simple SELECT statements, they may not contain [ORDER
BY](lang_select#orderby) or [LIMIT](lang_select#limitoffset) clauses.
[ORDER BY](lang_select#orderby) and [LIMIT](lang_select#limitoffset)
clauses may only occur at the end of the entire compound SELECT, and
then only if the final element of the compound is not a
[VALUES](lang_select#values) clause.

A compound SELECT created using UNION ALL operator returns all the rows
from the SELECT to the left of the UNION ALL operator, and all the rows
from the SELECT to the right of it. The UNION operator works the same
way as UNION ALL, except that duplicate rows are removed from the final
result set. The INTERSECT operator returns the intersection of the
results of the left and right SELECTs. The EXCEPT operator returns the
subset of rows returned by the left SELECT that are not also returned by
the right-hand SELECT. Duplicate rows are removed from the results of
INTERSECT and EXCEPT operators before the result set is returned.

For the purposes of determining duplicate rows for the results of
compound SELECT operators, NULL values are considered equal to other
NULL values and distinct from all non-NULL values. The collation
sequence used to compare two text values is determined as if the columns
of the left and right-hand SELECT statements were the left and
right-hand operands of the equals (=) operator, except that greater
precedence is not assigned to a collation sequence specified with the
postfix COLLATE operator. No affinity transformations are applied to any
values when comparing rows as part of a compound SELECT.

When three or more simple SELECTs are connected into a compound SELECT,
they group from left to right. In other words, if "A", "B" and "C" are
all simple SELECT statements, (A op B op C) is processed as ((A op B) op
C).

<span id="orderby"></span>

## 4. The ORDER BY clause

If a SELECT statement that returns more than one row does not have an
ORDER BY clause, the order in which the rows are returned is undefined.
Or, if a SELECT statement does have an ORDER BY clause, then the list of
expressions attached to the ORDER BY determine the order in which rows
are returned to the user.

In a [compound SELECT](lang_select#compound) statement, only the last or
right-most [simple SELECT](lang_select#simpleselect) may have an ORDER
BY clause. That ORDER BY clause will apply across all elements of the
compound. If the right-most element of a [compound
SELECT](lang_select#compound) is a [VALUES](lang_select#values) clause,
then no ORDER BY clause is allowed on that statement.

Rows are first sorted based on the results of evaluating the left-most
expression in the ORDER BY list, then ties are broken by evaluating the
second left-most expression and so on. The order in which two rows for
which all ORDER BY expressions evaluate to equal values are returned is
undefined. Each ORDER BY expression may be optionally followed by one of
the keywords ASC (smaller values are returned first) or DESC (larger
values are returned first). If neither ASC or DESC are specified, rows
are sorted in ascending (smaller values first) order by default.
<span id="nullslast"></span>

SQLite considers NULL values to be smaller than any other values for
sorting purposes. Hence, NULLs naturally appear at the beginning of an
ASC order-by and at the end of a DESC order-by. This can be changed
using the "ASC NULLS LAST" or "DESC NULLS FIRST" syntax.

Each ORDER BY expression is processed as follows:

1.  If the ORDER BY expression is a constant integer K then the
    expression is considered an alias for the K-th column of the result
    set (columns are numbered from left to right starting with 1).

2.  If the ORDER BY expression is an identifier that corresponds to the
    alias of one of the output columns, then the expression is
    considered an alias for that column.

3.  Otherwise, if the ORDER BY expression is any other expression, it is
    evaluated and the returned value used to order the output rows. If
    the SELECT statement is a simple SELECT, then an ORDER BY may
    contain any arbitrary expressions. However, if the SELECT is a
    compound SELECT, then ORDER BY expressions that are not aliases to
    output columns must be exactly the same as an expression used as an
    output column.

For the purposes of sorting rows, values are compared in the same way as
for <a href="https://www.sqlite.org/datatype3.html#comparisons"
target="_blank">comparison expressions</a>. The collation sequence used
to compare two text values is determined as follows:

1.  If the ORDER BY expression is assigned a collation sequence using
    the postfix [COLLATE operator](lang_expr#collateop), then the
    specified collation sequence is used.

2.  Otherwise, if the ORDER BY expression is an alias to an expression
    that has been assigned a collation sequence using the postfix
    [COLLATE operator](lang_expr#collateop), then the collation sequence
    assigned to the aliased expression is used.

3.  Otherwise, if the ORDER BY expression is a column or an alias of an
    expression that is a column, then the default collation sequence for
    the column is used.

4.  Otherwise, the
    <a href="https://www.sqlite.org/datatype3.html#collation"
    target="_blank">BINARY</a> collation sequence is used.

In a [compound SELECT](lang_select#compound) statement, all ORDER BY
expressions are handled as aliases for one of the result columns of the
compound. If an ORDER BY expression is not an integer alias, then SQLite
searches the left-most SELECT in the compound for a result column that
matches either the second or third rules above. If a match is found, the
search stops and the expression is handled as an alias for the result
column that it has been matched against. Otherwise, the next SELECT to
the right is tried, and so on. If no matching expression can be found in
the result columns of any constituent SELECT, it is an error. Each term
of the ORDER BY clause is processed separately and may be matched
against result columns from different SELECT statements in the compound.

<span id="limitoffset"></span>

## 5. The LIMIT clause

The LIMIT clause is used to place an upper bound on the number of rows
returned by the entire SELECT statement.

In a [compound SELECT](lang_select#compound), only the last or
right-most [simple SELECT](lang_select#simpleselect) may contain a LIMIT
clause. In a [compound SELECT](lang_select#compound), the LIMIT clause
applies to the entire compound, not just the final SELECT. If the
right-most [simple SELECT](lang_select#simpleselect) is a [VALUES
clause](lang_select#values) then no LIMIT clause is allowed.

Any scalar expression may be used in the LIMIT clause, so long as it
evaluates to an integer or a value that can be losslessly converted to
an integer. If the expression evaluates to a NULL value or any other
value that cannot be losslessly converted to an integer, an error is
returned. If the LIMIT expression evaluates to a negative value, then
there is no upper bound on the number of rows returned. Otherwise, the
SELECT returns the first N rows of its result set only, where N is the
value that the LIMIT expression evaluates to. Or, if the SELECT
statement would return less than N rows without a LIMIT clause, then the
entire result set is returned.

The expression attached to the optional OFFSET clause that may follow a
LIMIT clause must also evaluate to an integer, or a value that can be
losslessly converted to an integer. If an expression has an OFFSET
clause, then the first M rows are omitted from the result set returned
by the SELECT statement and the next N rows are returned, where M and N
are the values that the OFFSET and LIMIT clauses evaluate to,
respectively. Or, if the SELECT would return less than M+N rows if it
did not have a LIMIT clause, then the first M rows are skipped and the
remaining rows (if any) are returned. If the OFFSET clause evaluates to
a negative value, the results are the same as if it had evaluated to
zero.

Instead of a separate OFFSET clause, the LIMIT clause may specify two
scalar expressions separated by a comma. In this case, the first
expression is used as the OFFSET expression and the second as the LIMIT
expression. This is counter-intuitive, as when using the OFFSET clause
the second of the two expressions is the OFFSET and the first the LIMIT.
This reversal of the offset and limit is intentional - it maximizes
compatibility with other SQL database systems. However, to avoid
confusion, programmers are strongly encouraged to use the form of the
LIMIT clause that uses the "OFFSET" keyword and avoid using a LIMIT
clause with a comma-separated offset. <span id="values"></span>

## 6. The VALUES clause

The phrase "VALUES(*expr-list*)" means the same thing as "SELECT
*expr-list*". The phrase "VALUES(*expr-list-1*),...,(*expr-list-N*)"
means the same thing as "SELECT *expr-list-1* UNION ALL ... UNION ALL
SELECT *expr-list-N*". Both forms are the same, except that the number
of SELECT statements in a compound is limited by <a
href="https://www.sqlite.org/c3ref/c_limit_attached.html#sqlitelimitcompoundselect"
target="_blank">SQLITE_LIMIT_COMPOUND_SELECT</a> whereas the number of
rows in a VALUES clause has no arbitrary limit.

There are some restrictions on the use of a VALUES clause that are not
shown on the syntax diagrams:

- A VALUES clause cannot be followed by [ORDER BY](lang_select#orderby).

- A VALUES clause cannot be followed by
  [LIMIT](lang_select#limitoffset).

## 7. The WITH Clause

SELECT statements may be optionally preceded by a single [WITH
clause](lang_with) that defines one or more [common table
expressions](lang_with) for use within the SELECT statement.
<span id="tabfunc1"></span>

## 8. Table-valued Functions In The FROM Clause

A <a href="https://www.sqlite.org/vtab.html" target="_blank">virtual
table</a> that contains
<a href="https://www.sqlite.org/vtab.html#hiddencol"
target="_blank">hidden columns</a> can be used like a
<a href="https://www.sqlite.org/vtab.html#tabfunc2"
target="_blank">table-valued function</a> in the FROM clause. The
arguments to the table-valued function become constraints on the HIDDEN
columns of the virtual table. Additional information can be found in the
<a href="https://www.sqlite.org/vtab.html#tabfunc2"
target="_blank">virtual table documentation</a>.
<span id="nonstd"></span>

## 9. Deviations From Standard SQL

The SELECT syntax of SQLite differs slightly from standard SQL. These
differences are due to several reasons:

- In the mid-2000s, there was a lot of emphasis on keeping the library
  footprint as small as possible, so as not to use too much space on
  memory-limited flip-phones and similar.

- During the early years of SQLite, the lead developer sought to follow
  <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robustness_principle"
  target="_blank">Postel's Law</a> and to be forgiving and flexible in
  what input was accepted.

- There were bugs in early SQLite parsers that accepts some strange
  inputs.

- The lead developer's knowledge of SQL was imperfect.

Whatever the origin of the input quirks, we generally avoid trying to
"fix" them, as any new restrictions on the input syntax would likely
cause at least some of the millions of applications that use SQLite to
break. We do not want that. The goal of the SQLite development team is
to preserve backwards compability to the fullest extent possible. Hence,
if a syntax quirk is harmless, we leave it alone and document it here,
rather than try to fix it.

## 9.1. Strange JOIN names

SQLite accepts all of the usual syntax for JOIN operators:

<!-- do-not-touch-svg-import: 'select5.svg' -->

But it does not stop there. SQLite is actually very flexible in how you
specify a join operator. The general syntax is:

> *blah blah blah* **JOIN**

Where there are between 1 and 3 instances of "*blah*", each of which can
be any of "CROSS", "FULL", "INNER", "LEFT", "NATURAL", "OUTER", or
"RIGHT". The SQLite parser treats each of these keywords as an attribute
of the join, which can be combined in any order. This creates the
possibility of many new and creative join types beyond what is specified
by the syntax diagram. Some of these non-standard join types are
specifically disallowed. For example, you cannot say "INNER OUTER JOIN",
because that would be contradictory. But you can say things like "OUTER
LEFT NATURAL JOIN" which means the same as "NATURAL LEFT OUTER JOIN". Or
you can say "LEFT RIGHT JOIN" which is the same as "FULL JOIN".

Remember:you *can* use these non-standard join types but you *ought
not*. Stick to using standard JOIN syntax for portability with other SQL
database engines.

## 9.2. Precedence of comma-joins and CROSS JOIN

In standard SQL, joins that use the JOIN keyword take higher precedence
than comma-joins. That is to say, JOIN operators happen before comma
operators. This is not the case in SQLite, where all joins have the same
precedence.

Consider this example:

>     ... FROM t1, t2 NATURAL FULL JOIN t3 ...

In standard SQL, the FULL JOIN between t2 and t3 would occur first, and
then the result of the left join would be cross-joined against t1. But
SQLite always handles all joins from left to right. Thus, SQLite will do
a cross join on t1 and t2 first, then the result of that cross join will
feed into the FULL JOIN with t3. Inner joins are inherently associative,
so the difference is only evident if your FROM clause contains one or
more outer joins.

You can work around this, and make your SQL statements portable across
all systems, by observing the following stylistic rules:

- Do not mix comma-joins with the JOIN keyword. It is fine to use
  comma-joins, but if you do, the you should use only comma-joins for
  the entire FROM clause.

- Prefer LEFT JOIN over other outer join operators.

- When in doubt, use parentheses to specify the exact join order that
  you intend.

Any one of these suggestions is sufficient to avoid problems, and most
programmers instinctively follow all of these suggestions without having
to be told, and so the lack of precedence difference between comma-joins
and the JOIN keyword in SQLite rarely comes up in practice. But you
should be aware of the problem, in case it ever does appear.
